---
title: Occultist
sources:
  - Pathfinder Roleplaying Game Occult Adventures
tags:
  - Psychic

max_level: 20
hit_die: 8
starting_wealth: 4d6 × 10 gp (average 140 gp)
class_skills:
  - Appraise
  - Craft
  - Diplomacy
  - Disable Device
  - Disguise
  - Fly
  - Knowledge (arcana)
  - Knowledge (engineering)
  - Knowledge (history)
  - Knowledge (planes)
  - Knowledge (religion)
  - Linguistics
  - Perception
  - Profession
  - Sense Motive
  - Sleight of Hand
  - Spellcraft
  - Use Magic Device
skill_ranks_per_level: 4

bab_progression: mid
fort_progression: good
ref_progression: poor
will_progression: good

spells_per_day: mid
spell_list: occultist

weapon_proficiencies:
  - Simple
  - Martial
armor_proficiencies:
  - Light
  - Medium
shield_proficiencies:
  - Shields

class_features:

  - name: spells
    levels: [1]
    text: |
      An occultist casts psychic spells drawn from the occultist spell list, limited by the implement groups he knows. He can cast any spell he knows without preparing it ahead of time. Every occultist spell has an implement component. To learn or cast a spell, an occultist must have an Intelligence score equal to at least 10 + the spell level. The Difficulty Class for a saving throw against an occultist's spell equals 10 + the spell level + the occultist's Intelligence modifier.

      An occultist can cast only a certain number of spells of each spell level per day. His base daily spell allotment is given on Table: Occultist. In addition, he gains bonus spells per day if he has a high Intelligence score (see Table 1–3 on page 17 of the Pathfinder RPG Core Rulebook).

      The occultist's selection of spells is limited. For each implement school he learns to use, he can add one spell of each level he can cast to his list of spells known, chosen from that school's spell list. If he selects the same implement school multiple times, he adds one spell of each level from that school's list for each time he has selected that school. When the occultist learns to cast a new level of spells, he immediately adds one spell of that level to his list of spells known from each implement school he knows (plus any extra spells from schools he has selected multiple times).

      At 5th level and every 3 occultist levels thereafter (8th, 11th, and so on), an occultist can choose to learn a new spell in place of one he already knows. In effect, the occultist loses the old spell in exchange for the new one. The new spell's level must be the same as that of the spell being exchanged, and it must be at least one level lower than the highest-level occultist spell the occultist can cast. The spell learned must come from the same list of spells provided by the implement school of the spell lost. An occultist can swap only a single spell at any given level, and must choose whether or not to swap the spell at the same time that he gains new spells known for that level.

      An occultist need not prepare his spells in advance. He can cast any spell he knows at any time, assuming he has not yet used up his allotment of spells per day for the spell's level.

      **0-Level Occultist Spells:**

      - **Abjuration:** Resistance.
      - **Conjuration:** Create water, stabilize.
      - **Divination:** Detect magic, detect poison, detect psychic significance, guidance, know direction, read magic, sift.
      - **Enchantment:** Daze.
      - **Evocation:** Dancing lights, flare, light, spark, telekinetic projectile.
      - **Illusion:** Ghost sound.
      - **Necromancy:** Bleed, grave words, touch of fatigue.
      - **Transmutation:** Mage hand, mending, message, open/close, purify food and drink.

      **1st-Level Occultist Spells:**

      - **Abjuration:** Abjuring step, alarm, hex ward, hold portal, peacebond, shield, shock shield, warding weapon.
      - **Conjuration:** Cure light wounds, icicle dagger, mage armor, mount, returning weapon, unseen servant.
      - **Divination:** Anticipate peril, comprehend languages, detect secret doors, detect snares and pits, diagnose disease, discern next of kin, heightened awareness, identify, mindlink, object reading, psychic reading.
      - **Enchantment:** Charm person, command, forbid action, hypnotism, memorize page, memory lapse, murderous command, sleep.
      - **Evocation:** Burning hands, floating disk, shocking grasp.
      - **Illusion:** Alter musical instrument, blurred movement, decrepit disguise, disguise self, disguise weapon, illusion of calm, magic aura, mask dweomer, quintessence, shadow weapon, silent image, vanish.
      - **Necromancy:** Cause fear, decompose corpse, inflict light wounds, restore corpse, sculpt corpse.
      - **Transmutation:** Alter winds, ant haul, break, charge object, crafter's curse, crafter's fortune, enlarge person, erase, expeditious retreat, feather fall, gravity bow, jury-rig, keen senses, lead blades, liberating command, longshot, magic weapon, mirror polish, negate aroma, pass without trace, reduce person, refine improvised weapon, reinforce armaments, sundering shards, vocal alteration, youthful appearance.

      **2nd-Level Occultist Spells:**

      - **Abjuration:** Arcane lock, bullet shield, crimson confession, node of blasting, obscure object, resist energy.
      - **Conjuration:** Ablative barrier, apport object, cure moderate wounds, delay poison, glitterdust, mount (communal), returning weapon (communal).
      - **Divination:** Analyze aura, augury, blood biography, create treasure map, find traps, locate object, residual tracking, see invisibility, share language, share memory, status.
      - **Enchantment:** Aversion, bestow weapon proficiency, calm emotions, daze monster, demand offering, inflict pain, investigative mind, tactical acumen.
      - **Evocation:** Burning gaze, campfire wall, continual flame, darkness, defensive shock, flaming sphere, frost fall, ghost whip, gust of wind, pilfering hand, protective penumbra, shatter, sound burst.
      - **Illusion:** Blur, disguise other, ghostly disguise, implant false reading, instigate psychic duel, invisibility, magic mouth, mask dweomer (communal), minor image, mirror image, misdirection, phantom trap, symbol of mirroring.
      - **Necromancy:** Animate dead (lesser) , brow gasher, false life, inflict moderate wounds, object possession (lesser), pernicious poison, purge spirit, scare, skinsend, spectral hand.
      - **Transmutation:** Accelerate poison, air step, ant haul (communal), badger's ferocity, bowstaff, certain grip, chill metal, darkvision, disfiguring touch, effortless armor, enter image, feast of ashes, ghostbane dirge, glide, heat metal, knock, levitate, magic siege engine, make whole, masterwork transformation, mirror hideaway, perceive cues, reinforce armaments (communal), rope trick, silk to steel, spider climb, telekinetic assembly, unerring weapon, versatile weapon, warp wood, weapon of awe, wood shape.

      **3rd-Level Occultist Spells:**

      - **Abjuration:** Cloak of winds, dispel magic, erase impressions, explosive runes, magic circle against chaos/evil/good/law, nondetection, protection from energy, resist energy (communal), thaumaturgic circle.
      - **Conjuration:** Create food and water, cure serious wounds, minor creation, phantom driver, phantom steed, sepia snake sigil, symbol of healing.
      - **Divination:** Arcane sight, clairaudience/clairvoyance, follow aura, locate weakness, pierce disguise, retrocognition, seek thoughts, share language (communal), symbol of revelation, witness.
      - **Enchantment:** Control summoned creature , deep slumber, hold person, suggestion, symbol of laughter.
      - **Evocation:** Agonize, call lightning, daybreak arrow, daylight, deeper darkness, fireball, invisibility purge, lightning bolt, talismanic implement, tiny hut, twilight knife, wind wall.
      - **Illusion:** Adjustable disguise, aura alteration, displacement, illusory script, invisibility sphere, major image, vision of Hell.
      - **Necromancy:** Animate dead, bestow curse, gentle repose, healing thief , inflict serious wounds, riding possession, sands of time, sessile spirit, toxic gift.
      - **Transmutation:** Age resistance (lesser), bloodhound, countless eyes, cup of dust, darkvision (communal), flame arrow, fly, gaseous form, haste, heart of the metal, hostile levitation, keen edge, magic vestment, magic weapon (greater), secret page, shrink item, slow, spider climb (communal), stone shape, symbol of slowing.

      **4th-Level Occultist Spells**

      - **Abjuration:** Break enchantment, curse of magic negation, dimensional anchor, dismissal, enchantment foil, fire trap, freedom of movement, globe of invulnerability (lesser), life bubble, nondetection (communal), soothe construct, spell immunity, stoneskin, symbol of sealing, true form, unbreakable construct, wreath of blades.
      - **Conjuration:** Cure critical wounds, dimension door, major creation, phantom chariot, phantom steed (communal).
      - **Divination:** Arcane eye, contact other plane, detect scrying, locate creature, mind probe, scrying, symbol of scrying.
      - **Enchantment:** Charm monster, confusion, curse of disgust, daze (mass), hold monster, mind swap, mindwipe, planeslayer's call, symbol of persuasion, symbol of sleep.
      - **Evocation:** Ball lightning, contingent scroll, etheric shards, fire shield, flaming sphere (greater), ice storm, resilient sphere, river of wind, sending, shout, spirit-bound blade, unbearable brightness, wall of fire, wall of ice.
      - **Illusion:** Illusory wall, invisibility (greater), shocking image, symbol of striking, wandering star motes.
      - **Necromancy:** Death ward, false life (greater), fear, inflict critical wounds, object possession, poison, possession, summoner conduit, symbol of fear, symbol of pain.
      - **Transmutation:** Age resistance, air walk, darkvision (greater) , echolocation, magic siege engine (greater), malfunction, mirror transport, parchment swarm, planar adaptation, rapid repair, rusting grasp, treasure stitching.

      **5th-Level Occultist Spells:**

      - **Abjuration:** Dispel magic (greater), spell immunity (communal), spell resistance, stoneskin (communal).
      - **Conjuration:** Create demiplane (lesser), cure light wounds (mass), planar binding (lesser), secret chest, teleport, wall of stone.
      - **Divination:** Battlemind link, commune, find quarry, prying eyes, remote viewing, true seeing.
      - **Enchantment:** Command (greater), dominate person, forbid action (greater), inflict pain (mass), mind fog, suggestion (mass), symbol of stunning.
      - **Evocation:** Call lightning storm, cone of cold, fire snake, interposing hand, wall of force.
      - **Illusion:** False vision, mislead, persistent image, seeming.
      - **Necromancy:** Curse (major), entrap spirit, inflict light wounds (mass), object possession (greater), suffocation, symbol of weakness, unwilling shield.
      - **Transmutation:** Age resistance (greater), air walk (communal), awaken construct, control winds, energy siege shot, fabricate, ghostbane dirge (mass) , overland flight, telekinesis, transmute mud to rock, transmute rock to mud.

      **6th-Level Occultist Spells:**

      - **Abjuration:** Antimagic field, forbiddance, globe of invulnerability, repulsion, symbol of vulnerability.
      - **Conjuration:** Call construct, create demiplane, cure moderate wounds (mass), getaway, heal, planar binding, wall of iron.
      - **Divination:** Analyze dweomer, find the path, legend lore, prediction of failure, scrying (greater).
      - **Enchantment:** Antipathy, charm monster (mass), cloak of dreams, symbol of insanity, symbol of strife, sympathy.
      - **Evocation:** Blade barrier, chain lightning, cold ice strike, contagious flame, contingency, forceful hand, freezing sphere, sirocco.
      - **Illusion:** Permanent image, project image.
      - **Necromancy:** Harm, inflict moderate wounds (mass), possession (greater), symbol of death, temporary resurrection.
      - **Transmutation:** Animate objects, control construct, disintegrate, enemy hammer, energy siege shot (greater), ironwood, planar adaptation (mass), statue, transformation.

  - name: focus powers
    type: Su
    levels: [1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19]
    levels_text:
      1: base +1
      3: base +2
      5: base +3
      7: base +4
      9: base +5
      11: base +6
      13: base +7
      15: base +8
      17: base +9
      19: base +10
    text: |
      At 1st level, an occultist learns the base focus power from both of his two implement schools and can select one more focus power from the list of those available to him through those schools. Whenever the occultist learns a new implement school, he gains the base power of that school.

      - **Abjuration**---*Mind Barrier (Sp):* As a swift action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to create a shield of mental energy around you that protects you from harm. The shield prevents a total of 2 points of damage per occultist level you possess. It lasts until the start of your next turn or until exhausted. For example, if you are 5th level, the mind barrier protects you from 10 points of damage; if you are hit by an attack that would deal 12 points of damage, the mind barrier is exhausted and you take 2 points of damage. You can activate this ability as an immediate action, but doing so costs 2 points of mental focus instead of 1.
      - **Conjuration**---*Servitor (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to summon a servitor. This ability functions as *summon monster I*, but you can use it only to summon a single creature, and the effect lasts for 1 minute. At 4th level and every 3 levels thereafter, the level of the summon monster spell increases by 1, to a maximum of *summon monster VII* at 9th level. You can't have more than one servitor in effect at a time. At any time, you can expend 1 point of mental focus as a free action to extend the duration of an active servitor by 1 minute.
      - **Divination**---*Sudden Insight (Sp):* As a swift action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to gain an insight into your immediate future. You can use this foreknowledge as a free action before you roll any ability check, attack roll, or skill check to gain an insight bonus on that roll equal to 1/2 your occultist level (minimum +1). You can use your foreknowledge only once per turn, and if it's not used by the end of your turn, the insight fades and you gain no benefit.
      - **Enchantment**---*Cloud Mind (Su):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to cloud the mind of one foe within 30 feet. That foe is dazed for 1 round if the number of Hit Dice it possesses is less than or equal to or your occultist level. If it has more Hit Dice than your occultist level, it is staggered for 1 round instead. The foe can attempt a Will saving throw to negate the effect. Whether or not it succeeds at the save, the target is then immune to this effect for 1 day. This is a mind-affecting effect.
      - **Evocation**---*Energy Ray (Sp):* As a standard action that provokes attacks of opportunity, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to unleash a ray of pure energy as a ranged touch attack. This ray has a range of 30 feet. The ray deals an amount of energy damage equal to 1d6 points + 1d6 points for every 2 occultist levels you possess beyond 1st (2d6 at 3rd level, 3d6 at 5th, and so on, to a maximum of 10d6 at 19th level). When you unleash an energy ray, you must decide what type of damage it deals (acid, cold, electricity, or fire).
      - **Illusion**---*Minor Figment (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to create a minor figment. This can function as either *ghost sound* or *minor image. In either case, the effect lasts for a number of rounds equal to your occultist level. If you are 7th level or higher, the figment lasts for a number of minutes equal to your occultist level, and you can cause the figment to change once during its duration when a specified condition occurs.
      - **Necromancy**---*Mind Fear (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to cause a living creature to succumb to fear. The target must be within 30 feet of you, and it can attempt a Will saving throw to negate the effect. If the target fails the save and has a number of Hit Dice less than or equal to yours, it is frightened for 1d4 rounds. If the target fails the saving throw and has a number of Hit Dice greater than yours, it is instead shaken for 1d4 rounds. This is a mind-affecting fear effect.
      - **Transmutation**---*Legacy Weapon (Su):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus and touch a weapon to grant it an enhancement bonus. The bonus is equal to 1 + 1 for every 6 occultist levels you possess (to a maximum of +4 at 18th level). Enhancement bonuses gained by this ability stack with those of the weapon, to a maximum of +5. You can also imbue the weapon with any one weapon special ability with an equivalent enhancement bonus less than or equal to your maximum bonus by reducing the granted enhancement bonus by the appropriate amount. The item must have an enhancement bonus of at least +1 (from the item itself or from legacy weapon) to gain a weapon special ability. In either case, these bonuses last for 1 minute.

      In addition, at 3rd level and every 2 levels thereafter, he learns a new focus power selected from the options granted by all of the implement schools he knows. The occultist can use focus powers only by expending mental focus (see the [mental focus](#mental-focus) class feature). Unless otherwise noted, the DC for any saving throw against a focus power equals 10 + 1/2 the occultist's level + the occultist's Intelligence modifier. The occultist can't select a focus power more than once. Some focus powers require him to reach a specific occultist level before he can choose them.

      **Abjuration:**

      - *Aegis (Su):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus and touch a suit of armor or a shield to grant it an enhancement bonus. The bonus is equal to 1 + 1 for every 6 occultist levels you possess (to a maximum bonus of +4 at 18th level). Enhancement bonuses gained via this ability stack with those of the armor or shield, to a maximum total enhancement bonus of +5. You can also imbue the armor or shield with any one armor or shield special ability that has an equivalent enhancement bonus less than or equal to your maximum bonus granted by this ability by reducing the granted enhancement bonus by the appropriate amount. The item must have an enhancement bonus of at least +1 (from the item itself or from aegis) to gain an armor or shield special ability. In either case, these bonuses last for 1 minute.
      - *Energy Shield (Sp):* As a swift action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to surround yourself with a shield that protects you from energy damage. Whenever you take acid, cold, electricity, or fire damage, the shield absorbs the damage (as *protection from energy*). The energy shield can absorb up to 5 points of energy damage per occultist level you possess. This shield lasts for 1 minute or until its power is exhausted. Its effect doesn't stack with itself, with protection from energy, or with resist energy. You can activate the energy shield as an immediate action by expending 2 points of mental focus instead of 1. You must be at least 3rd level to select this focus power.
      - *Globe of Negation (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 3 points of mental focus to create a stationary globe of negation. This globe is 10 feet in diameter and cancels any spell effect that is cast into or through its area. This functions as *globe of invulnerability*, but it affects spells of any level. The globe can negate a total number of spell levels equal to your occultist level, after which the globe collapses. Spells that exceed the number of remaining levels remove all remaining levels, but are weakened; any creatures targeted by such spells receive a +4 circumstance bonus on any saving throws against the spells' effects. The globe lasts for a number of rounds equal to your occultist level. It has no effect on spells originating within the globe---only on those that enter its area as or after they are cast. You must be at least 11th level to select this focus power.
      - *Loci Sentry (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to set a ward about an area. This area has a maximum radius of 10 feet + 5 feet per occultist level you possess. Whenever a creature enters the area, a sentry manifested by your psyche appears and strikes out at the intruder. The affected creature must succeed at a Will save or be dazed for 1 round. You are immediately aware of the sentry's activation. The sentry lasts for up to 1 hour per occultist level you possess, or until triggered. When you set the sentry, you can set any number of specific creatures to be immune to the sentry and thus avoid triggering it.
      - *Planar Ward (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 2 points of mental focus to surround yourself with a planar ward. Creatures not native to the plane that you are currently on take a --4 penalty on attacks against you, and you receive a +4 circumstance bonus on saving throws against the spells, spell-like abilities, and supernatural abilities of such creatures. This ward lasts for 1 minute.
      - *Unraveling (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to unravel a magical effect. This functions as a targeted *dispel magic* spell, but you must be adjacent to the effect to unravel it. If the effect is created by psychic magic, you receive a +5 bonus on your caster level check to unravel it. If the effect targets an object in your possession, you automatically succeed at the check. You must be at least 5th level to select this focus power.

      **Conjuration:**

      - *Conjure Implement (Sp):* You can expend 1 point of mental focus to conjure any item that qualifies as an implement that you know how to use. This implement can be used as the item in question, functioning as a masterwork version of that item, and can also be used to cast your psychic spells, even though you did not select it at the beginning of the day. If you have more than one implement for the same school, decide which set of spells the conjured implement will grant when you first conjure it. The implement can't be used to store mental focus or create any effects that require mental focus. The implement lasts for 10 minutes per occultist
      level you possess.
      - *Flesh Mend (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to heal a living creature with a touch. The creature is healed an amount of damage equal to 1d8 + your occultist level. For every 4 occultist levels you possess beyond 3rd, the creature is healed an additional 1d8 points of damage, to a maximum of 5d8+19 at 19th level. This has no effect on undead creatures. You must be at least 3rd level to select this focus power.
      - *Mind Steed (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to conjure a spectral horse. This horse can be either Medium or Large, but it otherwise functions as *mount. The horse lasts for 10 minutes per occultist level you possess. If you are at least 5th level, the mount's base land speed increases by 20 feet. If you are at least 9th level and you expend 1 additional point of mental focus, the mount can fly at a speed of 60 feet with good maneuverability, but doing so reduces the mount's duration to 1 minute per occultist level you possess.
      - *Psychic Fog (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to create a cloud of fog. This fog lasts for 1 minute per occultist level you possess. It functions as *fog cloud, except it can't be dispersed by wind. At 7th level, you can expend 1 additional point of mental focus when creating this fog, causing it to become more tangible and function as solid fog, except it doesn't slow down any creature that has psychic powers or that can cast psychic spells. When you create a solid fog in this way, its duration is reduced to 1 round per occultist level you possess. You must be at least 3rd level to select this focus power.
      - *Purge Corruption (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to draw out the corruption from a creature. You must touch the target with your implement to use this power. This ability functions as either *neutralize poison* or *remove disease*, using your occultist level as the caster level. Each use of this ability can cure only one poison or one disease. You must be at least 5th level to select this focus power.
      - *Side Step (Sp):* You can create a temporary fissure in space by expending 1 point of mental focus. You can use this ability as part of a move action taken to move. The fissure begins in any square you designate and allows you to teleport to any other square you can see within 10 feet per occultist level. Stepping between these locations requires you to expend 5 feet of movement, and the movement through the rift does not provoke attacks of opportunity. This otherwise functions as *teleport*. You must be at least 7th level to select this focus power.

      **Divination:**

      - *Danger Sight (Sp):* As an immediate action, you can protect yourself from harm by expending 1 point of mental focus. You can use this ability whenever you are the target of an attack or are required to attempt a saving throw against a special ability, spell, or trap. Doing so grants you an insight bonus to your AC or on your saving throw equal to 1/2 your occultist level. This bonus applies only to the next attack against you or saving throw you attempt, and if not applied by the end of the round, the protection fades and you gain no benefit. You must be at least 3rd level to select this focus power.
      - *Future Gaze (Sp):* As a standard action, you can gain an insight into the future by expending 1 point of mental focus. This functions as *augury*, using your occultist level as the caster level.
      - *Mind Eye (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to create a mind eye---a magical sensor through which you can see and hear. The mind eye is invisible and its size is Fine, giving it an AC of 18. Any amount of damage to the eye destroys it, but it can be harmed by only spells or magic weapons. The eye moves with a fly speed of 60 feet with perfect maneuverability and can travel up to 1 mile away from you. You must concentrate as a standard action to direct the eye and receive sensory images through it. The mind eye sees as your eyes see, including any additional senses you possess (such as darkvision or see invisibility). The mind eye lasts for 1 minute per occultist level you possess. You must be at least 5th level to select this focus power.
      - *Object Seer (Sp):* As a full-round action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to gain insight into an object in your possession. You can ask one question, but that question must be tied in some way to the object, such as the nature of its power, the identity of the creature that last possessed it, or even where the object was when a certain event took place. You always receive an answer from the psychic impressions imprinted upon the item, but they are sometimes cryptic or misleading. This ability otherwise functions as *commune*. You must be at least 7th level to select this focus power.
      - *Powerful Connection (Su):* When casting a divination spell (such as *scrying*) that imposes a penalty on saving throws based on the physical connection you have to the target, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to double the penalty from a possession, garment, or body part. In addition, when casting any other divination spell that allows a saving throw, you can increase the DC of that save by 2 by adding an object, garment, or body part that belonged to the target as a focus component for the spell and expending 1 point of mental focus.
      - *Watchful Eye (Sp):* You can expend 1 point of mental focus as a standard action to create an invisible sensor within 30 feet that watches a 5-foot-square area. Whenever any creature enters that square, you receive a mental image of the creature as long as you are on the same plane as the sensor. The sensor remains active for 10 minutes per occultist level you possess. The image will not wake you from slumber, although you do receive all of the images the sensor collected once you wake up. The sensor can be deceived by invisibility and similar magic. You can expend additional points of mental focus when creating the eye to increase the size of the square by 5 feet per additional point spent (to 10 feet square, 15 feet square, and so on).

      **Enchantment:**

      - *Binding Pattern (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to create a binding pattern of psychic energy that causes a living creature to become paralyzed. The target must be within 30 feet of you, and it can attempt a Will saving throw to negate the effect. If it fails the save, it is paralyzed for 1 round for every 2 occultist levels you possess. At the end of each of its turns, it can attempt another Will save to end the paralyzed effect and instead be staggered for the remaining duration. This is a mind-affecting compulsion effect. You must be at least 7th level to select this focus power.
      - *Forced Alliance (Sp):* As a standard action, you can alter a living creature's mind, causing it to see you as a friend and ally. If the creature is the same creature type as you, this power requires you to expend 1 point of mental focus; if it's is not, you must expend 2 points instead. The creature can attempt a Will save to negate this effect. If it fails the saving throw, the creature treats you as an ally and doesn't attempt to harm you (although your allies are not protected). You can call on the creature to aid you directly, but while doing so the creature can attempt a new Will save at the end of each round to end the effect. This effect otherwise lasts 1 round per occultist level you possess. This is a mind-affecting charm effect. You must be at least 5th level to select this focus power.
      - *Inspired Assault (Sp):* As a standard action, you can inspire a living creature with a touch by expending 1 point of mental focus. The creature receives a morale bonus on attack rolls equal to 1 + 1 for every 6 occultist levels you possess (to a maximum bonus of +4 at 18th level). This bonus also applies on saving throws against fear effects. This bonus lasts for 1 minute.
      - *Mental Discord (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to disrupt the mind of one living creature within 30 feet. The creature can attempt a Will saving throw to negate the effect. If it fails the save, the creature can't concentrate on any spell effects and must succeed at a concentration check to cast any spell (DC = 15 + double the spell level). The affected creature takes a –4 penalty on this check if the spell includes a thought component. The creature takes a –2 penalty on all Will saving throws while under this effect. This effect lasts for 1 round per occultist level you possess.
      - *Mind Slumber (Sp):* By expending 1 point of mental focus as a standard action, you can lull a living creature into a deep mental slumber, forcing it to view the world as a dream. The target must be within 30 feet of you, and it can attempt a Will saving throw to negate the effect. If it fails the save, the creature falls asleep, although it still perceives the world around it as a dream. This doesn't cause the creature to fall prone, but it does drop whatever it is holding. The creature can't take any actions while in this state, but it isn't helpless---it perceives danger as part of its dream. The creature remains asleep for a number of rounds equal to your occultist level or until it takes any amount of damage, which immediately wakes it. At the end of each of its turns, it receives another Will saving throw to end the effect. The creature can be manipulated or examined without waking it, but it can't be moved from its square without waking it. This is a mind- affecting compulsion effect. Regardless of whether it succeeds at the save, the target is then immune to this effect for 24 hours. You must be at least 3rd level to select this focus power.
      - *Obey (Sp):* As a standard action, you can issue a command to one living creature by expending 1 point of mental focus. This functions as command. The target must be within 30 feet and capable of understanding your order. The target can attempt a Will save to negate this effect. If the creature is the same creature type as you, it takes a --2 penalty on this saving throw.

      **Evocation:**

      - *Energy Blast (Sp):* As a standard action that provokes attacks of opportunity, you can expend 2 points of mental focus to unleash a blast of energy. This blast has a range of 100 feet, and deals 5d6 points of energy damage, plus an additional 1d6 points for every 2 occultist levels you possess beyond 5th (6d6 at 7th, 7d6 at 9th, and so on, to a maximum of 12d6 at 19th level). The blast deals damage to each creature in a 20-foot-radius burst, but each affected creature can attempt a Reflex save to halve the damage. When you unleash an energy blast, you must decide what type of damage it deals (acid, cold, electricity, or fire). You must be at least 5th level to select this focus power.
      - *Energy Ward (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to surround yourself in a swirling ward of energy. When you activate this power, you must select acid, cold, electricity, or fire. You gain resistance 10 against that energy type, and whenever a creature hits you with a melee weapon or natural weapon, that creature takes 1d6 points of energy damage of the chosen type. Attacks made with melee weapons with reach don't cause the attacker to take this damage. At 13th and 19th levels, the resistance granted by this ward increases by 5, to a maximum of resistance 20 at 19th level. The energy ward lasts for 1 round per occultist level. You must be at least 7th level to select this focus power.
      - *Light Matrix (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to create a glowing orb of swirling lights that obeys your commands. This orb illuminates the area like the *light* spell. The orb can be commanded to hover over your shoulder, moving with you. As a move action, you can direct it to move up to 30 feet away from you. If the light matrix is ever more than 30 feet away from you, it returns to hover over your shoulder. If you are at least 5th level, you can direct the light matrix to make a melee touch attack against one foe within 30 feet. If the attack hits, the target must succeed at a Fortitude save or be blinded for 1d4 rounds by a flash of light. If the attack hits, regardless of whether the target succeeds at the save, the light matrix immediately ends. The light matrix otherwise has a duration of 1 hour per occultist level you possess. You can't have more than one light matrix in existence at one time. If you use this power again, any previous light matrices immediately end.
      - *Radiance (Sp):* As a standard action, you can touch a weapon to cause it to glow with light by expending 1 point of mental focus. The weapon produces light like a torch. For the purpose of darkness spells and abilities, this effect counts as a light spell of level 0, plus 1 additional spell level for every 2 occultist levels you possess. This light lasts for 1 minute per occultist level you possess. In addition, whenever the weapon scores a critical hit against a foe, the wielder can choose to end the effect, causing the foe to be surrounded by the radiance for 1d4 rounds. While illuminated in this way, the target can't benefit from concealment or invisibility, nor can it attempt Stealth checks to avoid being seen. All attack rolls made against an illuminated foe receive a +2 circumstance bonus.
      - *Shape Mastery (Su):* As part of casting an evocation spell with an area of effect, you can expend a number of points of mental focus up to your Intelligence modifier to exclude an equal number of squares from the area.
      - *Wall of Power (Sp):* By expending 1 point of mental focus as a standard action, you can create a wall of pure energy with a length of up to 5 feet per occultist level you possess. This wall is 10 feet high and 1 foot thick. It doesn't block passage, line of sight, or line of effect, but does deal damage to anyone passing through it. The wall deals 2d6 points of energy damage + 1 point of energy damage per occultist level you possess. You must select acid, cold, electricity, or fire when you create the wall to determine the type of damage it deals. The wall must be straight, and can't pass through a creature's space when created. The wall lasts for 1 round per occultist level you possess. You must be at least 9th level to select this focus power.

      **Illusion:**

      - *Cloak Image (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to hide your appearance behind an illusion, as *disguise self*. The effect lasts for 1 minute per occultist level you possess. At 5th level, you can instead expend 2 points of mental focus to appear as a creature of a different type, but you must remain the same size. At 7th level, you can expend 1 additional point of mental focus to target a willing creature other than yourself with this ability.
      - *Color Beam (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to unleash a beam of cascading colors at any one target within 30 feet. Doing so requires a ranged touch attack. If the beam hits, the target is blinded for 1 round if it has a number of Hit Dice equal to or lower than your occultist level. A foe with a number of Hit Dice greater than your occultist level is instead dazzled for 1 round. The foe can attempt a Will save to negate the effect. Regardless of whether it succeeds at its save, the target is then immune to this effect for 1 day. This is a mind-affecting illusion effect.
      - *Masquerade (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to take on the appearance of another creature that you touch. If the creature is not friendly to you, this requires a melee touch attack, but the target doesn't receive a saving throw to negate the effect. You gain a circumstance bonus on Disguise checks equal to your occultist level + 10, but only to look like the creature touched. This bonus doesn't stack with the bonuses from polymorph spells or spells like *disguise self*. While using this ability, you can change your disguise as a standard action by touching a different creature and assuming its appearance. You can end this effect at any time. This effect lasts for 10 minutes per occultist level you possess, but you can renew the duration at any time by expending 1 additional point of mental focus. You must be at least 7th level to select this focus power.
      - *Mirage (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to cloak an area in illusion, allowing you to change the area's appearance. You can affect up to one 5-foot-cube area for every occultist level you posses, changing the appearance in a way that seems natural to the surroundings, subject to GM discretion. You could, for example, hide a door or passageway, make a table appear to be covered in food, or even create the illusion of a pit. You can't make creatures or objects invisible with this power, but you can change the appearance of an object or create an illusion for creatures to hide behind. This functions as *major image*, and creatures that physically interact with the illusion in any way can attempt a Will save to see through the mirage. You must be at least 5th level to select this focus power.
      - *Shadow Beast (Sp):* As a standard action, you can call forth one or more beasts made of shadow by expending 1 point of mental focus. This functions as *shadow conjuration*, but it can be used to duplicate only the effects of *summon monster* spells. Creatures created with this spell deal 50% of the normal damage to those that disbelieve the illusion, and their nondamaging effects have only a 50% chance of affecting disbelieving targets. This can be used to duplicate any summon monster spell up to *summon monster V*. For every 2 additional levels you possess beyond 9th, the maximum spell level you can duplicate with this ability increases by 1 (to a maximum of *summon monster IX* at 17th level). Regardless of the spell duplicated, the creatures remain for 1 round per occultist level you possess. You must be at least 9th level to select this focus power.
      - *Unseen (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to become invisible, as *invisibility*. This effect lasts for 1 minute per occultist level you possess. You can expend 2 points of mental focus instead of 1 to use this power on a willing adjacent creature instead of yourself. You can still see creatures you make invisible with this power. If the invisible creature makes an attack or otherwise takes an action that would cause the invisibility to end, you can immediately expend 1 additional point of mental focus to allow the creature to remain invisible if the creature is within 30 feet of you. You must be at least 3rd level to select this focus power.

      **Necromancy:**

      - *Flesh Rot (Sp):* As a standard action, you can make a melee touch attack and expend 1 point of mental focus to cause the flesh of a living creature to rot and wither. If the attack hits, the target takes 1d8 points of damage + 1 point per occultist level you possess. For every 4 occultist levels you possess beyond 3rd, the target takes an additional 1d8 points of damage (to a maximum of 5d8 at 19th level). If you miss with the melee touch attack, this power is wasted with no effect. You must be at least 3rd level to select this focus power.
      - *Necromantic Servant (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to raise a single human skeleton (Pathfinder RPG Bestiary 250) or human zombie (Bestiary 288) from the ground to serve you for 10 minutes per occultist level you possess or until it is destroyed, whichever comes first. This servant has a number of hit points equal to 1/2 your maximum hit point total (not adjusted for temporary hit points or other temporary increases). It also uses your base attack bonus and gains a bonus on damage rolls equal to 1/2 your occultist level. At 5th level, whenever the necromantic servant would be destroyed, if you are within medium range (100 feet + 10 feet per level) of the servant, you can expend 1 point of mental focus as an immediate action to cause the servant to return to full hit points. At 9th level, you can choose to give the servant the bloody or burning simple template (if it's a skeleton) or the fast simple template (if it's a zombie). At 13th level, when you take an immediate action to restore your servant, it splits into two servants. You can have a maximum number of servants in existence equal to 1/2 your occultist level. At 17th level, the servant gains a teamwork feat of your choice.
      - *Pain Wave (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to unleash a wave of pain. This wave hits all creatures other than you in a 20-foot-radius burst centered on a point that you designate within 100 feet. All living creatures in this area are wracked with pain, gaining the sickened condition for 1 round per occultist level you possess. Affected creatures can attempt a Will save to reduce the duration to just 1 round. This is a mind-affecting pain effect. You must be at least 7th level to select this focus power.
      - *Psychic Curse (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to curse a living creature within 30 feet with your psychic magic. You can choose one of the following effects: memory lapse, mental block, or pain confusion. If you choose memory lapse, the target loses its memory of the past 1 hour per occultist level you possess. If you choose mental block, you can proscribe one specific action, such as attacking with a type of weapon, casting a specific spell, or something else suitably specific (subject to the GM's discretion). The target can't take that action without first succeeding at a Will save. If it fails, it can take other actions instead. If it attempts the prohibited action again on subsequent rounds, it gains a cumulative +2 bonus on the save until it succeeds. If you select pain confusion, the creature is confused for 1d4 rounds whenever it is damaged by a critical hit. The target can attempt a Will save to negate this effect. This effect lasts for 1 day per occultist level you possess. A creature can't be under the effects of more than one psychic curse at a time. This is a mind-affecting curse effect. You must be at least 5th level to select this focus power.
      - *Soulbound Puppet (Su):* As a full-round action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to create a soulbound puppet from a bone, doll, or skull. If you use a bone or a skull, your power builds a Tiny or Small flesh puppet around it that vaguely resembles the original creature from which the bones were taken. If the implement is a doll, the doll comes to life. Treat this as a familiar, using your occultist level as your wizard level to determine its powers and abilities. By using a bone or skull from the appropriate creature or a doll shaped like that creature, you can select any of the familiar choices available to a wizard. You can instead use a humanoid bone, doll, or skull, to give the puppet the base statistics of a homunculus (Bestiary 176), but without a fly speed or the poison bite or telepathic link abilities. No matter the form, this creature is a construct with an alignment matching your own. You can have no more than one soulbound puppet active at any given time. The soulbound puppet remains animated for 10 minutes per occultist level you possess.
      - *Spirit Shroud (Su):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to surround yourself with a shroud of spirit energy. You gain a number of temporary hit points equal to 1d6 + your occultist level. This shroud lasts for 1 minute per occultist level or until the temporary hit points are expended, whichever comes first. These temporary hit points stack with those from other sources, but not with those gained through multiple uses of this ability. At 4th level, as long as the shroud remains, you also gain a resistance bonus on all saving throws against death effects, fear effects, and any spells or effects that bestow negative levels or deal negative energy damage (if the spells or effects allow a save). This bonus is equal to 1 + 1 for every 4 occultist levels you possess beyond 4th. You must be at least 3rd level to select this focus power.

      **Transmutation:**

      - *Mind Over Gravity (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to give yourself a fly speed of 60 feet with perfect maneuverability. This effect lasts for 1 minute per occultist level you possess. You must be at least 7th level to select this focus power.
      - *Philosopher's Touch (Su):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus and touch a weapon, causing it to gain the properties of a special material. You can cause the weapon to be treated as cold iron or silver for the purposes of overcoming damage reduction for 1 minute per occultist level you possess. At 4th level and every 4 levels thereafter, you can touch an additional weapon as part of using this ability to grant that weapon the same benefit (still expending only 1 point of mental focus). At 11th level, you can cause any weapon affected by this ability to act as if it were adamantine instead (but only for the purposes of overcoming damage reduction, not for overcoming hardness).
      - *Quickness (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to grant supernatural quickness and reflexes to yourself or a willing living creature you touch. This functions as *haste, but the bonus to AC and on Reflex saving throws increases to +2. This effect lasts for 1 round per occultist level you possess. You must be at least 5th level to select this focus power.
      - *Size Alteration (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus and touch a creature to alter its size. You can increase or decrease the creature's size by one step, as *enlarge person* or *reduce person* but not limited by the creature's type. If the creature is hostile toward you, using this ability requires a successful melee touch attack, and the creature can attempt a Fortitude save to negate the effect. This effect lasts for 1 round per occultist level you possess. You can't use this ability on a creature that is already subject to an effect that alters its size.
      - *Sudden Speed (Sp):* As a swift action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to grant yourself a burst of speed. This increases your land speed by 30 feet for 1 minute. This ability does not stack with itself.
      - *Telekinetic Mastery (Sp):* As a standard action, you can expend 1 point of mental focus to grant yourself telekinetic power. This functions as *telekinesis*, except you don't need to concentrate on the effect to maintain it, and using any one of its effects is a standard action. This effect lasts for 1 round per occultist level you possess. You must be at least 9th level to select this focus power.

  - name: implements
    type: Su
    levels: [1, 2, 6, 10, 14, 18]
    levels_text:
      1: 2
      2: 3
      6: 4
      10: 5
      14: 6
      18: 7
    text: |
      At 1st level, an occultist learns to use two implement schools. At 2nd level and every 4 occultist levels thereafter, the occultist learns to use one additional implement school, to a maximum of seven schools at 18th level. Each implement school adds one spell per spell level of that school of magic to the occultist's spell list. No spells from any other school are considered to be on the occultist's spell list until he selects the associated implement school. He can't use spell trigger or spell completion magic items from unknown schools without succeeding at the appropriate Use Magic Device check. An occultist can select an implement school more than once in order to learn additional spells from the associated school.

      Each implement school is represented by a small list of objects. Every day, the occultist selects one item from that school's list to be his implement for the day for each implement school he knows. The occultist needs only one such item to cast spells of the corresponding school, unless he selected that implement school multiple times, in which case he needs one item for each set of spells gained from that school. Implements don't need to be magic items, and nonmagical implements don't take up a magic item slot even if they're worn. Implements that are not magic items are often of some historical value or of personal significance to the occultist, such as the finger bone of a saint, the broken scepter of a long-dead king, the skull of a mentor's familiar, or the glass eye of an uncanny ancestor.

      - *Abjuration:* Amulet, armor, bell, bracers, brooch, cloak, holy symbol, shield.
      - *Conjuration:* Bowl, brazier, compass, figurine, lantern, mirror.
      - *Divination:* Book, crystal ball, goggles, harrow deck, headband, lenses, planchette.
      - *Enchantment:* Censer, crown, helm, musical instrument, necklace.
      - *Evocation:* Gloves, rod, staff, wand.
      - *Illusion:* Crystal, hat, mask, prism, ring.
      - *Necromancy:* Bone, coin, doll, drum, robe, skull.
      - *Transmutation:* Belt, boots, sandals, vest, weapon.

      Whenever an occultist casts a spell, he must have the corresponding implement in his possession and present the implement to the target or toward the area of effect. This act is part of casting the spell and doesn't require any additional action. If the occultist lacks the corresponding implement, he can attempt to cast the spell, but must succeed at a concentration check (DC = 20 + the spell's level) to do so. Spells cast by an occultist without the appropriate implement are always treated as if they were cast at the minimum caster level for the spell in question (caster level 1st for a 1st-level spell, caster level 4th for a 2nd-level spell, and so on).

      Each implement school also grants a base focus power. This power is added to the list of focus powers possessed by the occultist (see the [mental focus](#mental-focus) class feature). In addition, each implement school grants access to a number of other focus powers that the occultist can select from using his mental focus class feature.

  - name: knacks
    levels: [1]
    text: An occultist learns one knack, or 0-level psychic spell, each time he selects an implement school (including when he again selects a school that he has already learned to use). These spells are cast like any other spell, but they can be cast any number of times per day. Knacks cast using any other spell slots because of metamagic feats applied to them, for example, consume spell slots as normal.

  - name: mental focus
    type: Su
    levels: [1]
    text: |
      An occultist can invest a portion of his mental focus into his chosen implements for the day, allowing him to utilize a variety of abilities depending on the implements and the amount of mental focus invested in them. An occultist has a number of points of mental focus equal to his occultist level + his Intelligence modifier; these points refresh each day. He can divide this mental focus between his implements in any way he desires. If an implement is lost or destroyed, the focus invested in it is lost as well, though the occultist still refreshes those points of focus normally.

      Once mental focus is invested inside an implement, the implement gains the resonant power of its implement school, and the occultist can expend the mental focus stored in the implement to activate the associated focus powers he knows. If a resonant power grants a bonus that varies based on the amount of mental focus invested in the implement, the bonus is determined when the focus is invested, and is not reduced or altered by expending the mental focus invested in the item. Once all of the mental focus in an implement has been expended, it loses its resonant power until mental focus is once again invested in the implement.

      - **Abjuration**---*Warding Talisman (Su):* The implement wards against adverse effects. Whoever wears (or holds, for bells) the implement gains a +1 resistance bonus on saving throws for every 2 points of mental focus invested in the implement, to a maximum bonus of 1 + 1 for every 4 occultist levels you possess.
      - **Conjuration**---*Casting Focus (Su):* The implement empowers the bearer's ties to the worlds beyond, allowing his spells to maintain their power for a longer period of time. The bearer can add the implement as an additional focus component to any conjuration spell he casts that has a duration measured in rounds per level. If he does so, he adds 1 to his caster level for every 2 points of mental focus stored in the implement (to a maximum bonus equal to your occultist level). This increase applies only when determining the duration of the spell. Apply this increase after other effects that adjust a spell's duration, such as Extend Spell.
      - **Divination**---*Third Eye (Su):* The implement allows its bearer to notice that which can't easily be seen. The implement grants a +1 insight bonus on Perception checks per 2 points of mental focus stored in it, to a maximum bonus equal to the occultist's level. If the occultist is 3rd level or higher and stores at least 3 points of mental focus in it, the implement also grants low- light vision. If the occultist is 5th level or higher and stores at least 6 points of mental focus in it, the implement also grants darkvision 60 feet. (If the bearer already has darkvision, the implement increases the range of the darkvision by 30 feet.) If the occultist is 7th level or higher and stores at least 9 points of mental focus in it, the implement also grants the effects of see invisibility. If the occultist is 13th level or higher and stores at least 12 points of mental focus in it, the implement also grants blindsense 60 feet. If the occultist is 19th level or higher and stores at least 15 points of mental focus in it, the implement also grants blindsight 30 feet.
      - **Enchantment**---*Glorious Presence (Su):* The implement invokes the presence of those who have worn it in the past. The implement's wearer gains a +1 competence bonus on all Charisma-based skill checks and ability checks for every 2 points of mental focus invested in the implement, to a maximum bonus of 1 + 1 for every 4 occultist levels you possess.
      - **Evocation**---*Intense Focus (Su):* The implement channels and enhances the effects of damaging evocations. A spellcaster who bears the implement can add the implement as an additional focus component for any of his damaging evocation spells that have an instantaneous duration or focus powers with an instantaneous duration. If he does so, the spell or focus power deals 1 additional point of damage of the same type to each creature for every 2 points of mental focus invested in the implement, to a maximum of 1 + 1 for every 2 occultist levels you possess.
      - **Illusion**---*Distortion (Sp):* The implement allows its bearer to distort his form and location, protecting him from harm. As a standard action, the bearer can gain a concealment miss chance equal to 5% for every point of mental focus invested in the implement (to a maximum of 5% + 5% for every 2 occultist levels you possess) until the next time the bearer makes an attack. If this miss chance reaches 50%, it doesn't increase further, but the bearer gains all the benefits of invisibility. Creatures with *see invisibility*, *true seeing*, or similar abilities ignore the miss chance from this ability.
      * **Necromancy**---*Necromantic Focus (Su):* The implement grants its possessor greater power over the undead. Whoever possesses the implement can control an additional 2 Hit Dice of undead for every point of mental focus invested in the item (to a maximum number of Hit Dice equal to 4 × your occultist level). Any spellcaster who bears the implement can add it as an additional focus component for a necromancy spell he casts to create undead. If he does so, he can create an additional number of HD of undead equal to the additional HD the implement allows him to control (apply this effect after doubling the HD of undead for desecrate, if applicable). Undead creatures take a --1 penalty on saving throws against spells cast by the bearer of this implement for every 4 points of mental focus invested in this implement.
      * **Transmutation**---*Physical Enhancement (Su):* The implement enhances its bearer's body. When you invest mental focus in the implement, select a physical ability score. The implement grants a +2 temporary enhancement bonus to that physical ability score for every 3 points of mental focus invested in the implement (to a maximum of +2 at 1st level, plus an additional 2 for every 6 occultist levels you possess).

      The implement grants its resonant power to whoever possesses it; the occultist can lend the implement to an ally to assist that ally, but if he does so, he has difficulty casting that implement's spells and can't expend that implement's focus on focus powers until he retrieves the implement or refreshes his focus.

      The occultist refreshes his mental focus once each day after receiving at least 8 hours of sleep. After refreshing his mental focus, the occultist must spend 1 hour preparing his implements and investing them with this power. Mental focus that is not used before the next time the occultist refreshes his focus is lost.

      The occultist can choose to save generic mental focus inside his own body instead of investing all of it, but expending this focus comes at a higher cost. Any focus power the occultist activates with generic focus costs twice as much mental focus to use (and to maintain, if applicable). The occultist can expend his generic focus through an appropriate implement on any focus power he knows, but an implement he didn't invest any focus in at the start of the day grants no resonant power.

  - name: magic item skill
    type: Ex
    levels: [2]
    text: At 2nd level, an occultist's knowledge of magic items grants him a bonus when attempting to use them. He gains a bonus on all Use Magic Device checks equal to 1/2 his occultist level.

  - name: object reading
    type: Su
    levels: [2]
    text: At 2nd level, an occultist learns how to read information from items he examines. Examining an item in this way requires him to spend 1 minute handling the item. If the item is a magic item, the occultist learns its properties and command word as if he had successfully examined the item using detect magic and succeeded at a Spellcraft check. This ability does not reveal whether the item is cursed unless the occultist's class level is equal to or greater than the caster level of the item. If the item has any historical significance, the occultist learns one piece of information about its past (as determined by the GM). Finally, if the item was last used no longer than 1 day ago per the occultist's class level, the occultist learns one piece of information about the last creature to use the item. This information might be a glimpse of the creature's appearance, a brief vision of what it saw while using the item, or perhaps its emotional state when it last used the item. The GM determines what information is gained in this way. This functions like the psychometry occult skill unlock, but doesn't require a skill check and can be used at will.

  - name: shift focus
    type: Su
    levels: [4]
    text: At 4th level, an occultist gains the ability to shift his mental focus from one implement to another, though some of the focus is lost along the way. Shifting mental focus removes a number of points of mental focus from one implement and adds the same number --1 to another implement; this takes 1 minute of quiet contemplation while touching both implements. The occultist can shift his mental focus only from one implement to another implement; he can't shift generic focus into an implement. Unlike expending focus normally, this shift can reduce the effect of a resonant power in the implement from which the mental focus was taken. It does not, however, add to the resonant power of the implement to which the focus is added.

  - name: aura sight
    type: Su
    levels: [5]
    text: At 5th level, the occultist can read the auras of creatures around him as a standard action. This functions as the *aura sight* spell with a duration of 1 round.

  - name: magic circles
    type: Su
    levels: [8]
    text: At 8th level, an occultist learns how to draw magic circles. To draw a circle, he must have chalk, salt, blood, powdered silver, or some other appropriate substance at hand (although he can press a magic circle into a softer surface such as dirt or clay). Drawing a circle takes 1 minute and requires the occultist to expend 1 point of mental focus (either generic focus or focus from any one of his implements). Once completed, this circle functions as a permanent magic circle against any alignment of the occultist's choosing. The circle can't be against a component of the occultist's alignment (if he is lawful good, for example, it can't be a magic circle against good or law). The circle remains until its form is physically broken (for example, if the lines are smeared or the salt is scattered). Only a living creature can break the circle; environmental effects can't break it. An occultist can have only one circle created in this way at a time. If he creates a second circle, the first one loses all its magic powers. This type of magic circle can't normally be focused inward to bind an outsider.

  - name: outside contact
    type: Su
    levels: [8, 12, 16, 20]
    text: |
      At 8th level, the occultist learns the true name of one particular outsider. This outsider can have no more than 3 Hit Dice. Whenever the occultist creates a magic circle, he can expend 1 additional point of mental focus to focus the circle inward and lure that outsider to the circle (similar to using *lesser planar binding*). The outsider is bound for up to 10 minutes. During this time, the occultist can bargain with the outsider for one piece of information. This requires a payment of at least 20 gp (or items of at least that value that are of interest to the outsider). The bargaining requires the occultist to attempt a Diplomacy or Intimidate check opposed by the outsider's Sense Motive check. Succeeding at the check by 5 or more reduces this cost to 10 gp. Failure increases the price to 30 gp, whereas failure by 5 or more allows the outsider to escape without giving any information (or receiving payment). The information gained can be anything that might be learned through a divination spell. The information is always correct but is frequently cryptic. It typically takes the outsider 1d3 hours to gather the information, at which point it returns of its own accord to deliver the information as promised. The outsider always resents being used in this way, even if the occultist and the outsider share an alignment component. After the occultist bargains with the outsider, the magic circle loses all power and the outsider is sent back to its home plane.

      At 12th level and every 4 levels thereafter, the occultist learns to contact one additional outsider of the same type or a different type. Although he can call only one outsider in this way at a time, the occultist can ask such an outsider one additional question per calling for every 4 occultist levels he possesses beyond 8th (to a maximum of four questions at 20th level), all for the same bargaining price. The questions must be in some way related to one another.

      At 16th level, in lieu of asking questions, the occultist can demand that the outsider deliver a message to any one friendly creature that the occultist knows personally. The occultist can also task the outsider to deliver one object weighing no more than 1 pound. Either of these demands requires an opposed check as described above. Delivery typically takes 1d4 hours, but this period is reduced to 1d6 minutes if the recipient is within 1 mile of the occultist (or even less if the recipient is within sight). The occultist must be able to accurately describe the recipient in both name and appearance. This ability can't be used to deliver anything to a location, or to enemies or creatures that are unfriendly to the occultist.

  - name: binding circles
    type: Su
    levels: [12]
    text: At 12th level, whenever the occultist creates a magic circle he can expend 1 additional point of mental focus to make it a binding circle. A binding circle is invisible and counts as a trap. If a living creature of the corresponding alignment steps inside it, the trap triggers and binds the creature inside the circle. While it can move freely within the circle, it can't leave the circle, make attacks against targets outside the circle, cast spells that cross the circle's boundary (the circle blocks line of effect from the inside), or use any ability that would allow it to leave the circle or disturb the circle in any way. When the circle traps a creature in this way, the creature can attempt a Reflex save to dive out of the circle before the magic takes hold (DC = 10 + 1/2 the occultist's level + the occultist's Intelligence modifier). A creature that can see the circle gains a +4 bonus on this save. If it fails its save, the creature must remain in the circle, although it can attempt a Will save at the same DC at the end of each hour of imprisonment to escape. A binding circle can be spotted with a successful Perception check (DC = 25 + 1/2 the occultist's level). It can also be disarmed using Disable Device, with the same DC. Anything crossing the boundary of the circle from the outside, such as a weapon, spell effect, or special ability, immediately breaks the circle and frees the creature trapped inside.

  - name: fast circles
    type: Su
    levels: [16]
    text: At 16th level, the occultist learns to draw magic circles very quickly. He can draw a magic circle as a full-round action, but any circle drawn in this way has a duration of 1 minute per occultist level (unless it's drawn in conjunction with the outside contact class feature, in which case it lasts for 10 minutes as normal). If he draws a binding circle in this way, its duration is 1 round per occultist level.

  - name: implement mastery
    type: Su
    levels: [20]
    text: At 20th level, an occultist learns to master one of his implements. He selects one implement school. Whenever he uses a focus power from an implement of that school, the DC to resist any of the effects increases by 4 and he treats his occultist level as 4 higher when determining the effects and duration of that power. In addition, the occultist gains 4 extra points of mental focus, but these points must always be invested in implements of the mastered school. He can't save these points or expend them for any ability other than the focus powers of those implements. The hardness of each of the occultist's implements of the mastered school increases by an additional 20 as long as the item has at least 1 point of mental focus stored within.

---

The occultist focuses on the world around him, grounded in the powers that flow throughout his environment. He studies the magic that infuses everything, from psychic resonances left in everyday items to powerful incantations that fuel the mightiest spells.

The occultist channels his psychic might through implements---items that allow him to focus his power and produce incredible effects. For him, implements are more than simple tools. They are a repository of history and a tie to the events of the past. The occultist uses these implements to influence and change the present, adding his legend to theirs. Though some of these implements might be magic items in their own right, most of them are merely of historical or personal significance to the occultist.

**Role:** Occultists are always eager to travel in the company of adventurers, explorers, and archaeologists, as those three groups of people have a knack for finding items with rich histories and great significance.
